someone who looks like me
walks past you in the street
do you think they're a mother a refugee
or a victim of oppression or do you
think they're a cardiologist
a barrister or maybe your local
politician
do you look me up and down wondering how
hot i must get or
if my husband has forced me to wear this
outfit
what if i wore my scarf like this
i can walk down the street in the exact
same outfit
and what the world expects of me in the
way i'm treated depends
on the arrangement of this piece of
cloth
but this isn't going to be another
monologue about the hijab because lord
knows muslim women
are so much more than the piece of cloth
they choose to wrap
or not wrap their head in this
is about looking beyond your bias
what if i'd walked past you and later on
you'd found out that actually
i was a race car engineer and that i
designed my own race car and i ran my
university's race team
because it's true what if i told you
that i was actually trained as a boxer
for five years
because that's true too would it
surprise you
why ladies and gentlemen
ultimately that surprise and the
behaviors associated with it
are the product of something called
unconscious bias or implicit prejudice
and that results in the ridiculously
detrimental lack of diversity in our
workforce
particularly in areas of influence hello
australian federal cabinet
let me okay let me just set something up
from the outset right
unconscious bias is not the same as
conscious discrimination i'm not saying
that in all of you there's a secret
sexist or racist or just like lurking
within waiting to get out
right that's not what i'm saying there's
we all have our biases
they're the filters through which we see
the world around us right
i'm not accusing anyone bias is not an
accusation rather
it's something that has to be identified
acknowledged and mitigated against
bias can be about race it can be about
gender it can also be about class
education disability the fact is we all
have biases against what's different
what's different to our social norms
the thing is if we want to live in a
world
where the circumstances of your birth
do not dictate your future and where
equal opportunity is ubiquitous then
each and every one of us has a role to
play
in making sure unconscious bias does not
determine our lives
there's this really famous experiment in
the space of unconscious bias and that's
in the space of gender in the 1970s and
1980s
so orchestras back in the day were made
up mostly of dudes
there was up to only five percent were
female
and apparently that was because men
played it differently
presumably better presumably but in 1952
the boston symphony orchestra
started an experiment they started blind
auditions
so rather than face-to-face auditions
you would have to play behind a screen
now funnily enough
right no immediate change was registered
until they asked the auditioners to take
their shoes off before they entered the
room
because the clickly clack of the heels
against the hardwood floors
was enough to give the ladies away now
get this
the results of the audition showed that
there was a 50
increased chance a woman would progress
past the preliminary stage
and it almost tripled their chances of
getting in
what does that tell us well
unfortunately for the guys
men actually didn't play differently but
there was the perception
that they did and it was that bias that
was determining their outcome
so what we're doing here is identifying
and acknowledging that advice exists and
look
we all do it right let me let me give
you an example a son and his father are
in a
horrible car accident right the father
dies on impact
and the son who's severely injured is
rushed to hospital
the surgeon looks at the sun when they
arrive and is like
i can't operate why
the boy is my son
how can that be ladies and gentlemen the
surgeon
is his mother now hands up and it's okay
but hands up if you initially assumed
the surgeon was a guy
there's evidence that that unconscious
bias exists but we all just have to
acknowledge that it's there and then
look at ways that we can move
past it so that we can look at solutions
now one of the interesting things around
the space of unconscious bias
is the topic of quotas and this is
something that's often brought up
and one of the criticisms is this idea
of merit
look i don't want to be i don't want to
be picked you know because i'm a chick
right i want to be picked
because i have merit because i'm the
best person for the job
it's a sentiment that's pretty common
again among female engineers that i work
with and that i know
and yeah i get it i've been there but if
the merit idea was true why would
identical resumes in an experiment done
in 2012 by yale identical resumes
sent out for a lab technician why would
jennifer
be deemed less competent be less likely
to be offered the job
and be paid less than john's
the unconscious bias is there but we
just have to look at how we can move
past it
and you know it's interesting there's
some research that talks about why this
is the case and it's called
the merit paradox right and in
organizations and this is kind of ironic
in organizations that talk about merit
being their primary value driver in
terms of who they hire
they were more likely to hire dudes and
more likely to pay the guys more because
apparently
merit is a is a masculine quality but
hey
all right so you guys think you've got a
good read on me you kind of think you
know what's up
um can you imagine me running one of
these
can you imagine me walking in villa a
boys this is what's up this is how it's
done
well i'm glad you can
because ladies and gentlemen that's my
day job
and the cool thing about it is that it's
pretty entertaining actually
in places like malaysia muslim women on
riggs isn't even comment worthy
there are that many of them but it is
entertaining i remember when one of the
guys i was telling one of the guys hey
mate look i really want to learn how to
surf right
and he's like yasmin i don't know how
you can surf with all that gear you got
on
um and i don't know any women only
beaches
and then the guy came up with a
brilliant idea he was like i know you
run that organization when
youth without borders right why don't
you start like a clothing line for like
muslim chicks and beaches
you can call it youth without board
shorts
and i was like thanks guys and and then
another i remember another bloke telling
me that i should eat all the yogurt i
could
because that was the only culture i was
going to get around there
right um but the problem is
it's kind of true because there's an
intense lack of diversity
in our workforce particularly in places
of influence now
in 2010 the australian national
university did an experiment where they
sent out
4 000 identical applications right to
entry-level jobs essentially to get the
same number of interviews as someone
with an anglo-saxon name
if you were chinese you had to send out
more applications if you're middle
eastern
abdulmajeed you have to send out 64 and
if you're italian you're pretty lucky
you only have to stand out 12 percent
more
in places like silicon valley it's not
that much better right in google
they put out some diversity results and
um 61
white 30 asian and nine a bunch of
you know blacks hispanics all that kind
of thing and the rest of the
the rest of the tech world is not that
much better and they've acknowledged it
but i'm not really sure what they're
doing about it and the thing is it
doesn't trickle
up in a study done by green park who are
a british sort of senior exec supplier
they said that over half of the ftse 100
companies
don't have a non-white leader at their
board level executive or non-executive
and two out of every three
uh don't have an executive who's
from a from a minority and most of the
minorities that are at that sort of
level
are non-executive board directors so
their influence isn't that great
but hey look i mean i've told you a
bunch of terrible things you're like oh
my god how bad is that what can i do
about it
well fortunately we've identified that
there's a problem
there's a lack of opportunity and that's
due to unconscious bias
but you might be sitting there thinking
well you know i am brown
what's that ought to do with me
let me offer you a solution and as i
said before we live in a world
where you know we're looking for an
ideal and if we want to create a world
where your
the circumstances of your birth don't
matter we all have to be part of the
solution and interestingly
the person the author of the lab resume
experiment offered some sort of a
solution
she said the one thing that brought the
successful women
together the one thing they had in
common was the fact that they had good
mentors
so mentoring we've all kind of heard
that before it's
you know it's in the vernacular here's
another challenge for you
i challenge each and every one of you to
mentor someone
different think about it right everyone
wants to mentor someone who kind of is
familiar who looks like us we have
shared experiences
if i see a muslim chick who's got a
better attitude i'm like what's up we
can hang out
right you walk into a room and there's
someone who went to the same school you
play the same sports
there's a high chance that you're going
to want to help that person out
but for the person in the room who has
no shared experiences with you
it becomes extremely difficult to find
that connection so the idea of finding
someone different to mentor
someone who doesn't come from the same
background as you whatever that
background is is about
opening doors for people who couldn't
even get to the damn hallway
because ladies and gentlemen the world
is not just
people are not born with equal
opportunity i was born
in one of the poorest cities in the
world i was born
brown i was born female and i was born
muslim in a world that is
that is pretty suspicious for reasons i
can't control
however i also acknowledge the fact that
i was born with privilege i was born
with amazing parents
i was given an education and had the
blessing of migrating to australia
but also i've been blessed with amazing
mentors who have opened doors for me
that i didn't even know were there a
mentor who said to me hey your story is
interesting
let's write something about it so that i
can share it with people a mentor who
said
i know you're all the things that don't
belong on an australian rig but come on
anyway
and here i am talking to you and i'm not
the only one if you
there's all sorts of people in my
communities that i see have been helped
out by mentors a young muslim
man in sydney who ended up using his
mentor's help
to start up a poetry slam in bankstown
and now it's a huge thing
and he's able to change the lives of so
many other young people or a lady here
in brisbane an
afghani lady who's a refugee could
barely speak english when she came to
australia
her mentors helped her become a doctor
and she took out
young queenslanders of the year in 2008.
she's an inspiration
right
this is so not smooth
anyway this is me right
but i'm also the woman in the ring
clothes and i'm
also the woman that was in the airbag at
the beginning
would you have chosen to mentor me if
you'd seen me in one of those other
versions of who i am
because i'm that same person
we have to look past our unconscious
bias find someone to mentor who's at the
opposite end of your spectrum
because structural change takes time and
i don't have that level of patience
okay so if we're going to create a
change if we're going to create a world
where we all have those kind of
opportunities then choose to open doors
for people
because you might think that diversity
has nothing to do with you
but we are all part of the system and we
can all be part of that solution
and if you don't know where to find
someone different go to the places you
wouldn't usually go
if you enroll in private high school
tutoring go to your local state school
or maybe
just drop into your local refugee
tutoring center or perhaps you work at
an office
take out that new grad who looks totally
out of place because that was me
and open doors for them not in a
tokenistic way because we're not victims
but show them the opportunities because
opening up your world
will make you realize that you have
access to doors they didn't even know
existed and you didn't even know
they didn't have ladies and gentlemen
there is a problem in our community with
lack of opportunity
especially due to unconscious bias but
each and every one of you
has the potential to change that and i
know you've been given a lot of
challenges today
but if you can take this one piece and
think about it a little differently
because diversity is magic right and i
encourage you
to look past your initial perceptions
because i bet you
they're probably wrong thank you